PROJECT SUMMARY
Behavioral development emerges from a variety of factors interacting across multiple domains and time scales. To capture this complexity and richness, most developmental scientists rely on video recordings as the mainstay of their research programs. However, the wealth of analytic possibilities remains largely untapped because developmental scientists have not traditionally engaged in open sharing of video data. But, open data-sharing is a scientific imperative and common practice in the other areas of science where it has substantially accelerated the pace of discovery. This project aims to facilitate deeper, richer, and broader scientific understanding of behavioral development by creating the infrastructure to enable open sharing of video-based data in a web-based repository we call "Databrary" (databrary.org).

No large-scale scientific repository for sharing digital video data currently exists. So, we will create one based on open-source tools, and seed it with initial data sets and analysis tools to attract users. We will develop desktop data management tools to make contributing video files and metadata convenient and reliable, and we will create mechanisms to enable transcoding, searching, browsing, visualizing, streaming, and downloading files in the Databrary. Current commercial and academic video coding tools lack flexibility; their proprietary formats prohibit users from sharing coded files. OpenSHAPA (openshapa.org), a free, platform-independent, open-source video-coding tool developed by the PIs, will become the common file format for the Databrary. We will develop tools to convert data coded in other systems to the OpenSHAPA format, and we will enhance OpenSHAPA to support integration of additional, multimedia data streams such as eye tracking, motion tracking, EEG, and EMG. We will address cultural, historical, technical, and privacy/ethics challenges associated with open sharing of video data by building an engaged and diverse user/contributor community of developmental scientists who commit to data-sharing and to the creation of standards for data access and quality. With community input, we will continue to develop template permission language so that investigators can collect and contribute datasets to the library, and we will develop contributor and user agreements to ensure appropriate levels of access. We will provide training and technical support to the emerging user community through workshops, webinars, and on-site training.

Intellectual Merit. By creating tools for open video data-sharing, we expect to deepen insights and accelerate the pace of discovery in developmental science. The contribution of a particular dataset will no longer depend on the private analytic and interpretive activities of researchers from one laboratory, but instead benefit from the critique and imagination of many researchers with different viewpoints. This strengthens the credibility of the research enterprise as a whole. Researchers will be able to view one another’s datasets and reanalyze them to test competing hypotheses, perform integrative analyses, learn from prior examples, and address new questions beyond the scope of the original study.

Broader Impacts. Through our community building, we will train a new generation of developmental scientists who will be empowered with an unprecedented set of tools for discovery. Some of the researchers who benefit will come from institutions without substantial resources to support scientific research. Moreover, the infrastructure we develop will have impacts beyond the developmental science community. The entire behavioral science community can benefit from the OpenSHAPA and open data-sharing tools, and we expect that insights that emerge from this project can facilitate open data-sharing and better data management practices in other research communities. Finally, by enabling increased transparency in behavioral research, we will raise the profile of developmental and behavioral science and bolster interest in and support for scientific research among the public at large.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION

￼Behavioral development emerges from a confluence of factors interacting across multiple domains and time scales. Its study demands recording instruments that can capture this complexity and richness. Most developmental scientists—comprising thousands of psychologists, clinicians, movement scientists, and others—rely on video as the backbone of their research programs because only video faithfully renders the phenomena they aim to describe and explain. Video coding—applying user-defined “tags” to events of interest— transforms the behaviors captured on video into quantitative data for statistical analysis.

Traditionally, developmental scientists have not engaged in open sharing of video data 1. This culture of isolation arose for historical, legal, ethical, and pragmatic reasons, and past reliance on analog video limited widespread data dissemination. There is precedent for addressing issues such as participant anonymity and researcher attributions 2–6, and digital video overcomes the dissemination problem. However, sharing video presents its own unique set of challenges 2,3 — how to provision an infrastructure for storing and accessing data, create tools for tagging videos to enable exploration and analysis, and foster a culture of open collaboration that embraces the benefits offered by open video data-sharing.

Open sharing of digital information is a scientific imperative and common practice in the biomedical 7, physical 8, and earth sciences 9, and it is an emerging mandate for federal funding in the behavioral sciences. NSF’s National Science Board encourages “individual scientific communities to establish data-sharing and management practices that align with NSF data policies” 10. In order for open data-sharing to become the new norm, we must create the infrastructure and culture to enable sharing of digital video. This will enable the benefits of data- sharing to impact discovery in the developmental and behavioral sciences as it has in other domains of research.

Project Aims

The overall goal of this project is to facilitate deeper, richer, and broader scientific understanding of behavioral development. Most developmental studies focus on a narrow subset of behaviors within delimited domains produced by small samples at particular time points. After publication, the rich, largely under-used videos moulder quietly on a shelf. These practices limit generalizability of findings, impede peer oversight, and slow progress. We aim to create the infrastructure, coding tools, and community practices to enable developmental scientists to share raw video files, associated metadata, and vital details about research methods in a centralized “Databrary.” We will also create a linked repository for analysis, visualization, and data-mining tools. Achievement of these aims will accelerate the pace of scientific discovery and deepen insights into the causes and origins of complex behavior.

Aim 1: Create the infrastructure and data management tools to enable open sharing of video data among developmental scientists
No large-scale scientific repository for sharing digital video data currently exists. We aim to create a system we call Databrary that makes contributing video and metadata convenient and reliable, permits powerful and transparent searching through deposited datasets, and enables discovery. The software we develop will be open source and wherever possible incorporate existing tools and infrastructure 11–15.

Aim 2: Expand and develop the OpenSHAPA coding tool to facilitate annotation, exploration, visualization, analysis, and sharing of video data
OpenSHAPA 16, a free, platform-independent, open source video-coding tool developed by the PIs, will provide the common file format for data-sharing in the Databrary. OpenSHAPA empowers users to view, code, explore, visualize, and analyze patterns in their data and it enables integration of multimedia data streams. We will develop tools to convert data coded in other systems to the OpenSHAPA format.

Aim 3: Build the capacity for data-sharing and coding based on the expertise and needs of the developmental science community
Currently, sharing of video data occurs only through small-scale collaborations. Important barriers to open data-sharing include cultural and historical factors 1,17, technical resources and expertise, and questions about privacy and research ethics. Thus, a central priority is building an engaged and diverse user/contributor community of developmental scientists committed to open data-sharing and to the creation of standards for data access and quality.

Summary of Aims

We will develop a web-based open video data-sharing repository, Databrary.org, and seed it so that users can engage the system early on. We will develop data management tools to enable sharing and mechanisms that permit interoperability between coding tools. We will develop template IRB language for a data-sharing permission form (attached) so that investigators can begin to collect and contribute datasets to the library, and we will develop appropriate contributor and user agreements to ensure appropriate levels of access. We will expand the OpenSHAPA coding tool to meet diverse research needs, such as incorporating multi-media data with video. We will pursue our aims with the endorsement and participation of the developmental science community. And finally, we will develop and implement plans for long term sustainability.

Background and Rationale

Developmental science presents special challenges for research infrastructure. Targeted investments have the potential to transform the way researchers share, store, and analyze data.

Nature of Developmental Data

Developmental science asks fundamental questions about the origins and causes of complex behavior—who we are and how we got this way. The field is broad and varied, spanning topics in social, linguistic, perceptual, emotional, motor, and cognitive development. Research designs run the gamut from naturalistic home studies to experimental lab paradigms, from basic research with typically developing children to applied studies and clinical interventions. Ages cover the entire lifespan. Sampling may be once or multiple times. Yet, embedded in this breadth and diversity are commonalities. Developmental scientists focus on understanding change, and to do so, we record and interpret behavior over time.
Video, the most common medium for recording behavior, has unique challenges and virtues 2,3. Video often accompanies other data streams (physiological recordings, brain imaging, EMG, motion tracking, eye tracking, verbal transcripts). Multiple data streams—including 2+ camera views—require tools for synchronization and integration and benefit from multivariate time series analyses. Many labs lack the resources to adopt tools for detailed video coding and complex analyses. Furthermore, widespread use of video creates a data explosion: The typical developmental lab collects 8-12 hours of video/week 18 in widely varied formats. Thus, sharing digital video requires substantial storage capacity, powerful search and streaming tools, and significant computational resources for transcoding videos into common, preservable formats.
￼￼￼￼￼￼
Data coding is rightfully idiosyncratic. Behaviors of interest vary across studies and few tags are de rigueur except children’s age and sex. Nonetheless by exploiting the metadata that typically accompany developmental studies, manual curation can be kept to a minimum, as shown in other fields 19. Typical developmental studies include global metadata (manuscripts, protocols, codebooks, etc.) that are already sufficient to guide search for appropriate datasets. The raw data typically comprise multiple video files and associated metadata. OpenSHAPA, for example, creates spreadsheet files linked to each video file that include time-linked tags to events of interest, study design information, and participant demographics. These tags can also be used to search for appropriate data sets and to browse their videos. Thus, the challenge of searching a shared repository of developmental data can be mitigated by combining the existing, investigator-defined metadata with powerful search, data mining, and meta-analysis tools such as those deployed in the neuroimaging community 20,21.

Figure 1. Depiction of relationships among raw video data and metadata. Each study typically produces global forms of metadata (manuscripts, codebooks, protocols, etc). Within each study, each video file is associated with metadata that describe its contents. Screen shot shows an OpenSHAPA spreadsheet (with participant demographics, user- defined behavioural codes and visualization of nested data structure), video controller, and one video frame.

Why Share Video Data?

Researchers will be motivated to contribute data because a history of data-sharing and a plan to commit data to an open repository will enhance the likelihood of federal funding. Their work will receive more attention and citations by users 22, and their data and tools will survive in useable form beyond their lifetimes. Researchers will be inspired to use data in the repository because effective data-sharing can transform discovery in developmental science. Imagine the rapid progress that would be made if developmental researchers could point readers and reviewers to raw video data that illustrate procedures and findings; if users could browse for exemplars to stimulate new work; if researchers could gather preliminary data, expand samples, run replications, examine cohort effects, and assess effects of geographic location or population by using data in a shared archive; and if instructors could search for suitable examples to illustrate methods and findings to their students. Imagine how much firmer a foundation we could lay if there were true transparency such that researchers could view each other’s methods. Open sharing would allow researchers to extend prior work by building on each other’s codes and to score and analyze video files in ways unimagined by the original researcher. Researchers could use tools contributed to the archive to enhance understanding of their own data and use data to test their analytic tools. They could collaborate with like-minded researchers in a sub-area of development to create corpora with shared coding schemes and analysis tools as exemplified by repositories such as TalkBank 4,5.

Precedents for Data-sharing

The innovation of the proposed project is the focus on sharing large amounts of raw video representing the diversity of developmental science. However, data-sharing of text and image files is not new. Examples in neuroscience include the Biomedical Informatics Research Network (BIRN) 11 and the International Electrophysiology Epilepsy Data Portal (IEEG) 23. In the behavioral/social sciences, four projects inspire our vision: the Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research (ICPSR) 24, TalkBank and CHILDES 25, the Social Informatics Data Grid (SIDGrid) 26, and the DIVER project 2,27. For 50 years, ICPSR has housed and curated quantitative, demographic, and sociological data related to education, aging, criminal justice, substance abuse, terrorism and related fields. It is affiliated with the Institute for Social Research at the University of Michigan and offers membership to institutions. For 30 years, the TalkBank/CHILDES repository at Carnegie Mellon has housed and curated a set of databases with transcript, audio, and video data relevant to the study of language and developed transcription and analysis tools. SIDGrid is a computing infrastructure that provides integrated computational resources through the TeraGrid for processing multimodal data on social communication. It combines data collection, storage, coding, analysis, and sharing, and represents communication in real-time combining different data types. DIVER, developed at Stanford, is a tool for viewing and annotating video and sharing it with others over the web.
Our project builds on the best practices established by these entities. The directors of ICPSR, TalkBank, SIDGrid, and BIRN are on our external advisory board. They have already provided counsel on critical issues: effective mechanisms for controlling access to a repository (ICPSR); the importance of fostering a scientific community that advocates for the resource (TalkBank; SIDGrid; ICPSR); the challenges of creating software that scientists will actually use (SIDGrid; BIRN); the desirability of making data contribution easy (BIRN, ICPSR); the tensions between instituting standard search and coding ontologies versus allowing these to emerge organically from the community (TalkBank, BIRN, ICPSR); the utility of adapting and adopting free, open source, existing tools whenever possible (BIRN); the importance of a broad base of institutional support (BIRN, ICSPR, SIDGrid, TalkBank) and its link to sustainability (ICPSR); and, the need to ensure that the infrastructure provides sufficient incentives for investigators to contribute to and draw from the data repository (TalkBank, SIDGrid, ICPSR, BIRN).

Challenges of Sharing Video Data and Associated Metadata

Permission, access, and security. Sharing video poses special ethical 28 problems to contributors and users. Video data cannot be anonymized without reducing information content. Concealing participants’ identity (e.g., by pixilation or blocking faces) would limit the utility of the data. Thus, researchers risk violating participants’ privacy if digital images are viewed or released to the public without authorization.

Our aim is provide access to authorized users while protecting participants’ confidentiality based on best practices established by ICPSR through institution-level agreements and TalkBank through investigator-level agreements. Contributors must be authorized investigators whose research is under institutional (IRB or equivalent) supervision; they must gain permission for data-sharing from all individuals depicted on the videos; consenting individuals must understand what level of access their permission grants; contributors must ensure that all shared videos have been tagged with the level of access granted by participants; and they must sign a contributor agreement, probably monitored or enforced through institutional IRBs. Users likewise must be authorized investigators who agree to uphold the limits on access granted by the original participants; and they must sign a formal data use agreement possibly monitored or enforced through local IRBs. In spirit, we aim to extend the ethical principles researchers agree to uphold in their own laboratories to authorized users of the data library.

Licensing. To set guidelines for how data can be used, we will establish easy-to- understand data licensing arrangements, such as the creative commons licenses 15

Attribution/citation. Most researchers will contribute data after completing data collection and a manuscript is submitted or in press. Based on the TalkBank and ICPSR models, and with guidance from experts in data citation and attribution 6, we will develop practices for acknowledging and citing the researchers and organizations that originally invested resources in the contributed data. Creating the technology for users to cite data sets by permanent URLs, such as a digital object identifier (DOI) or its equivalent 29, has clear advantages. It creates incentives to deposit data and bolsters scientific integrity and long-term access 24.

Data coding tools. Commercially distributed video coding tools include Mangold Interact, Noldus Observer® XT, and StudioCode. Their strengths include technical support, richly featured mature software bases, and extensions for specialized analyses. But, commercial tools have important limitations. They are expensive; users cannot alter fundamental functionality; software upgrades are commercially driven; and proprietary formats impede sharing files across coding tools. Several non-commercial coding tools are available under open-source licenses. ELAN 30 is free and Transana 31 charges a nominal fee. Like many academic tools, ELAN and Transana specialize in certain research domains (language and education research, respectively) and do not easily convert into other formats. OpenSHAPA 16 is a free, platform- independent, open source tool developed by the PIs, inspired by MacSHAPA 32, which was developed during 1990-1994 with intermittent upgrades until the early 2000s. OpenSHAPA is a general-purpose tool. It offers powerful features and high-level flexibility through a scripting interface, and is a logical foundation for an open-data repository for developmental science.
Data formats. For data to be shared, uploaded documents from multiple formats (video, spreadsheets, databases, etc.) must be converted into a set of standard formats for storage and preservation. Because video compression can reduce image quality below useful levels, data must be uploaded and converted at the highest possible resolution and quality format. Common data formats used in the repository must be non-proprietary and have a high likelihood of interoperability with unknown future standards. With co-I Millman and media archival experts on our internal board, we will resolve the problems of common video formats and transcoding video and coding spreadsheets in an accurate, timely, and cost-efficient manner.

Searching and storage. Video records of behavior are so rich that users must be able to search and browse files based on how data were used previously and how data can be used in the future. Expansion of user metrics tools developed by PI Freeman 61 can be used to monitor which data sets are being accessed, how often, and by whom. Video data consume substantial amounts of computer storage. Streaming and downloading videos pose problems due to their size. As an illustration, a 20s low-resolution (568x320 pixels) color video clip taken from a typical smart phone creates about 2 MB of data or about 360 MB/hr. Higher resolution video grows even faster—1-2 GB/hr. A typical lab 18 could generate 0.5 TB of high-resolution video data per year. Codebooks, spreadsheets, and other metadata are tiny in comparison. An unknown fraction of collected data will not be suitable for sharing. But, clearly a data archive with video as the hub must find ways to reliably store vast amounts of information.

Sustainability. By creating an open data-sharing library, our institutions and we are establishing a shared public resource that will benefit the scientific community and the public at
￼users to “remix, tweak, and build upon” the work for non-commercial uses so long as the original
that permit
￼￼data depositors are credited and the new work is licensed under the same terms. Researchers
￼who breach the data use or licensing terms lose access to the repository. Under institutional-
￼level agreements like those at ICPSR, PIs in violation of data use provisions may be subject to
￼research misconduct penalties.

large. Thus, we must create mechanisms for sustaining the library technically and financially beyond the period of the current grant. The successful long-term sustainability of ICPSR and TalkBank give us confidence that our project can achieve comparable longevity and success.
Our Vision
We seek to leverage the power of emerging information technologies and analytic approaches to enable open video data-sharing in developmental science. We propose concrete steps to overcome existing barriers in academic culture by engaging the scientific community and garnering its support. We will build on the best practices of previous data-sharing projects, and develop low-cost, open-source solutions that make data coding and sharing rewarding and convenient for investigators, contributors, and users. Our activities center around: (1) development of the Databrary repository and data management tools; (2) expansion and refinement of the OpenSHAPA video coding tool; and (3) creation and support of an engaged community of developmental scientists that will inform and shape the development of the infrastructure to ensure that we create a sustainable system for scientific discovery.
Progress to Date/Results from Prior Support
This project builds on prior work by the PIs, including an NSF workshop on open data- sharing, development of the OpenSHAPA video coding tool, and recent community outreach.
NSF Workshop. In September 2011, PIs Adolph and Sanderson hosted an NSF-sponsored (award #1139702) workshop “Data Coding, Analysis, Archiving, and Sharing for Open Collaboration: From OpenSHAPA to Open Data-sharing” in Arlington, VA. Participants included 39 researchers in developmental science, educational research, computer science, and cognitive science, along with program officers from NSF, NICHD, and IES. Discussions focused on the promises and pitfalls of open video-based data-sharing in developmental science. The strong consensus was that the barriers were surmountable, potential benefits were many, and the timing is right. The current proposal reflects consultations with workshop attendees during and after the workshop and with many others.
OpenSHAPA development. The source code for open-source versions of OpenSHAPA is available 16 under a GPLv3 license. Since 2008, pre-open-source versions were available to beta users. Currently more than 220 researchers have used OpenSHAPA 18,000 times for an average of 60 minutes per use. OpenSHAPA contributors include the OpenSHAPA Foundation Limited, National ICT Australia, NYU, UQ, and members of the advisory group.
OpenSHAPA has many important features. (1) Flexible generic syntaxes allow user-defined coding schemes to address any aspect of behavior. Current options are free-form text, single- and multiple-term codes, and predicate structures. (2) Users can enter, view, and edit codes, transcriptions, and comments, and tag events with start and end times in a spreadsheet window. The spreadsheet uniquely displays temporal relations in different formats, including a visualization of the nested and interleaved unfolding of events (Figure 1). Time tags can be used to link cells or store computed durations. (3) Users can create plug-ins to integrate data streams from different media, link them in time, and display them in appropriate formats. They can play multiple data streams simultaneously (e.g., videos, spectrograms, motion-tracking output, and plots over time). (4) Because it is impossible to predict and meet every need, the Ruby scripting language allows researchers to write scripts to handle specific needs. Use of the scripting language also helps OpenSHAPA developers identify needs that can be met more simply in the user interface (e.g., scripts to perform aggregate analyses across multiple data files; to modify, insert, select, delete arguments and cells, import and export specialized forms of data; and to conduct statistical operations). (5) A project-information file links media, spreadsheet, and screen layouts, preserved from the last work session. Further development will include data management tools to facilitate contributions to the Databrary.
￼￼6
Community Building and Outreach. PI Adolph routinely promotes OpenSHAPA and open data-sharing at conferences and colloquia. She has held a dozen free training workshops on MacSHAPA/OpenSHAPA in response to researchers’ requests. The NSF workshop generated excitement about open data-sharing among leaders in developmental and information science, several of whom have agreed to serve on this project's advisory board. The advisory board includes directors of current data-sharing efforts (BIRN, SIDGrid, TalkBank, ICPSR) and experts in video archiving, behavioral research methodology, data visualization, pattern detection and recognition, user interface design, and high performance computing.
To ensure that the infrastructure and software we develop responds to researchers’ needs and exploits their expertise, we will expand and deepen communication among a network of labs committed to using OpenSHAPA and open data-sharing. Over 80 developmental scientists have signed on as “committed contributors” 33 and will seek IRB approval for open data-sharing. Since few researchers currently have permission for open data-sharing, it is critical to mobilize the community now to ensure data to deposit. Accordingly, with input from prospective contributors and IRB officers, we have established language for a participant permission form to release data for sharing. We will post template forms on the Databrary web page for researchers to download and adjust to their needs. We will also seek community input about best practices for contributor and user agreements and for proper citation and attribution.
Project Plan
Our activities consist of four main projects that follow from our specific aims: developing the infrastructure for open data-sharing, creating a data management tool, expanding the OpenSHAPA coding tool, and building a community of contributors/users.
Developing Data-sharing Infrastructure
To develop the Databrary, we will create a user/contributor access and authentication system; collect seed datasets; develop and test software and hardware infrastructure for data hosting and storage; create and test mechanisms for searching, browsing, and summarizing data; and develop mechanisms for uploading and transcoding data and ensuring preservation.
Hire and Train Technical Staff
Co-PI Freeman will supervise the software development team. Based at UQ, he will coordinate with the team daily via video conferencing, IM, and web-based project management tools. Freeman will spend 6 wks/year on site at NYU where most of the programming team will reside. We will stagger hiring across Year 1 in order of work priority, so that the team grows organically.
Collect and Deposit “Seed” Data Sets
The quality and number of contributed datasets will affect success of the project. To sustain interest among the scientific community, we will seed the repository with interesting datasets. From a technical perspective, we need sample data to design storage, transcoding, file linkage, database, and search services and to determine video file formats. We have commitments for seeding the repository from MacWhinney (TalkBank) and Tamis-LeMonda (NSF-center multi- ethnic longitudinal data). We will provide the community with consensus template language to expedite collection of new data suitable for sharing. We will also encourage researchers (e.g., advisors Bakeman and Molenaar) to contribute useful analytic tools to the repository. Although the tools need not be computationally integrated with the Databrary or OpenSHAPA, having such software accessible will attract researchers to the Databrary.org site at an early stage.
We will manually collect seed datasets and tools, evaluate the nature of the codebooks, publications, and other metadata, and use them to inform system design efforts and browse/search tool development. Similarly, we will evaluate contenders for the common video
￼￼￼7
archive codec based on technical suitability and data quality, with a strong preference for HTML5-compliant non-proprietary/open source formats, such as WebM 14 or H.264.
Develop and Test Infrastructure for Data Storage and Retrieval
To develop a powerful database backend, we face several challenges: diversity of datasets, analysis tool types, and metadata formats; uncertain or idiosyncratic logical links between data files; and the immense size of video data. To illustrate, the entire 50-year ICSPR data store constitutes only 10 TB, whereas the Databrary.org initiative may generate 10 TB within months of operation. Video storage and retrieval require substantial upfront planning and high-end server hardware and bandwidth. We will limit the size of the archive to 100 TB over the 5-year project period. This figure comes from our poll of the developmental science community's video collection rates 18, committed contributor list, and from conservative estimates about the rate of data deposits. It will enable the Databrary to support up to 150 data contributors. We believe this is a realistic estimate. Should growth exceed this capacity, we would seek supplemental funding.
Initial seed data sets and analysis tools will be organized via a pure directory listing. Then, we will develop a data structure using open source software and populate it. We will define a basic view of the data elements to go in the archive, such as how to represent a single study, a single clip, a portion of a clip, and so on. Dataset, tool, and user databases will then be integrated. Backup, replication, and restore mechanisms and procedures will be implemented that follow data preservation best practices (e.g., ICPSR). Our plan is to host the primary archive and server at NYU with a complete mirror at PSU. We plan to deploy high-end storage arrays specialized for streaming video at both sites to store and serve data reliably and to reduce system administrator costs.
Design and Create Authentication and Access Systems for Contributors and Users
Core challenges include limiting access to authorized investigators, ensuring that contributors share only data they have permission to share, and limiting user access based on permissions granted by participants. This activity has policy/practice and technical dimensions.
Policy/Practice Components. We will adapt model procedures (e.g., ICPSR) for authenticating users via their institutions, securing data use agreements from them, and ensuring that contributors warrant that have been properly approved for sharing by participants.
Giving permission to share data is entirely separate from giving consent to participate in the research study. We developed template data-sharing permission language (attached) for research participants with input from our advisory board, the research community, and IRB staff at NYU and PSU. After sharing the draft template, we received commitments from more than 80 investigators to seek IRB approval for future studies 33. We will share the template language with committed contributors and the broader community through our website. Based on their feedback, we will continue to refine the template. Our goal is not to dictate the exact language researchers must use, but to indicate community consensus about principles contributors and users must uphold and what this means for participants who give permission to share their data.
The consensus among the project team and advisors is that participants can grant various levels of access, public viewing, and release of digital images/video excerpts (Figure 2). We expect that most participants will agree to share their video and metadata, but participants can refuse to permit any data-sharing and those files would not be uploaded to the repository. Those who agree will also choose how video may be viewed: by public audiences for scientific purposes (e.g., professional conferences, talks) and/or educational purposes (e.g., classroom lectures, workshops) or only by authorized users in the conduct of scientific research. If participants agree to public viewing, they will also choose whether to release digital files of images and video excerpts: permission to release digital files to individuals who are not authorized users of the data library or no permission to release any digital files outside the
￼￼8
library. Authorized users must exercise professional judgment and uphold ethical principles in determining which files to show to the public and which to release, to whom, and how.
Figure 2. Permission levels for sharing data, viewing image/video excerpts, and releasing digital files.
Technical Issues. We will consult with advisors Alter (ICPSR), Kesselman (BIRN) and others to develop systems to manage user accounts, authenticate identities, track user and contributor agreements, monitor data use, and related issues. When possible, we will adapt or adopt wholesale existing tools so that our development efforts focus on solving new problems.
Develop Software for Contributing Data: Uploading, Transcoding, Data Quality Checking, and Preservation Schemes
On the client/user side, we will develop a data management tool for packaging and uploading data to temporary storage (described below). On the server side, we will develop tools that take contributed data sets from the temporary store, convert the files into the common formats of the repository, create the associated database fields, and add the data to the repository. Transcoding video poses substantial computational demands. Rather than ask users to face the challenge of running complex conversion programs on their own lab machines, we will do transcoding on the centralized servers, where processes can run in the background over hours or days. To ensure that the Databrary is not limited to OpenSHAPA users, we will develop routines to convert files from other video coding tools into the OpenSHAPA format. Since file format conversion can result in file quality losses, a human data quality supervisor will check that conversions proceed without error, and we will also explore the development of automated QA mechanisms. We will also coordinate closely with the NYU Library (through Co-I Millman) in the development of best practices for transcoding, storage, and long-term data preservation.
Develop Searching, Browsing, Summarizing, Citation, Preservation, and Visualization Systems
After we create the basic database architecture, we will develop tools for searching, browsing, summarizing, citation, preservation, and data visualization. Searching will initially focus on metadata at the study level (Figure 1), but later will incorporate mechanisms that allow users to search tags within individual codebooks and OpenSHAPA spreadsheets. An early priority will be developing mechanisms to generate low-resolution video previews for browsing and streaming. Here, our development team will be guided by internal advisor Howard Besser’s “Understanding 9/11: A Television News Archive” project 34 and related work.
We will develop mechanisms to allow contributed datasets to be cited in published work via persistent URLs, such as digital object identifiers (DOIs) or their equivalents 29. User agreements will require citations of the relevant datasets and papers in subsequent publications and presentations. This will reward early contributors with increased citation counts and raise the public profile of the Databrary. We will create a collection development policy. Most academics assume that everything should be preserved. Archivists know that saving everything is impossible, that trying to save everything might mean nothing is saved. Thus, we will develop policies that balance the desire to preserve as much as possible with the hard constraints of storage cost and curation effort. In developing these policies we will be guided by existing practice 24 and community input. For example, datasets that are part of published papers or those with higher usage/citation rates may receive priority. We will also encourage researchers to contribute data extraction, analysis, and visualization tools that capitalize on the multivariate time-dependent nature of behavioral video data. Some tools may be simple scripts that operate on OpenSHAPA spreadsheet files; others will be stand-alone analysis tools. With the guidance
￼￼￼￼9
of advisors Roy Pea, Roger Bakeman, Peter Molenaar, Nilam Ram, Luke Zhang, Yann Lecun, and Jan Plass, we will also reach out to the education, statistics, computer science and data visualization communities to develop new analytic tools.
Develop a Data Management Tool
Our advisers tell us that technical and cultural barriers impede open data-sharing, even among committed PIs. To reduce these barriers, we will develop a data management tool inspired by related software in other disciplines 12 to enable PIs to organize their data in a form that makes sharing and linking more transparent and data uploading convenient and reliable. PIs have widely differing practices for designing codebooks and spreadsheets, managing participant demographic data (age, sex, date of test), and so forth. So, the tool will be used during data collection to organize files associated with a study—video, text, spreadsheets, database, images, and coded metadata—prior to submission to the Databrary. Users will employ the tool to tag video and metadata files with the appropriate access levels granted by participants to ensure consistency between participants, contributors, and the repository. Once a study has been “packaged” for sharing, the tool will also be used to manage the time and computer resources for uploading data. We envision the tool to be closely integrated with OpenSHAPA, but to be a stand-alone product so that labs using other video coding tools may also use it.
Expanding the OpenSHAPA Coding Tool
OpenSHAPA is already a powerful and useful tool employed by hundreds of investigators, but there are many areas for improvement and enhancement.
Upgrade Video and Audio Support
For eventual compatibility with web-based video viewing, we will upgrade OpenSHAPA to support the same HTML5-compliant open source formats as Databrary.org. OpenSHAPA currently provides basic audio stream visualization; upgrades will make audio support more rapid and accurate. Audio visualization will be interactive so end-users can manipulate which frequencies are emphasized in the display, what level of noise energy represents “silence,” and the kinds of sound patterns that should be automatically classified as events of interest.
Add Hooks to Incorporate Eye Tracking, Motion Tracking, Physiological, Imaging, and Other Data Streams into OpenSHAPA
Although video data will remain the backbone of developmental science for the foreseeable future, developmental scientists increasingly incorporate other dense time-based measures (eye tracking, motion tracking, and psychophysiological measures) into their studies. The PIs have expertise in these issues. Adolph currently uses multi-camera video with eye tracking and motion tracking. Gilmore uses EEG and video, and in collaboration with Adolph is incorporating eye tracking with motion tracking and computer-based video analysis.
OpenSHAPA provides support for plugins to synchronize multiple, time-based data streams to concurrent video and audio streams. Development will focus on additional data types. Because data streams have different sampling rates, we will develop features to ensure that streams are temporally aligned and can be resampled or stretched into different time bases. The problem is difficult but worth tackling. A successful tool will permit developmental scientists to visualize and analyze patterns in their multivariate data that might otherwise remain hidden.
Develop Data Visualization and Analysis Tools
OpenSHAPA’s use of the Ruby scripting language lets end-users build their own analyses and extensions. However, further basic data visualization and analysis will be implemented, accessible via windows and dialogs from the user interface, to support everyday needs. We will build data filtering mechanisms to let users highlight subsets of the data and perform actions on
￼￼￼￼10
those subsets. To enable further data visualization, we will extend OpenSHAPA’s “temporal spreadsheet” display, event timeline displays, and various forms of time trees and structured listings. We will also provide basic content analysis. In providing these capabilities, we will decide which features should be native to OpenSHAPA, and which supported through scripts, links to open-source software such as the statistics package R and to other tools such as Bakeman’s Generalized Sequential Querier (GSEQ) 35 and the Gates/Molenaar extended unified SEM 36. Our software developers will jump-start creation of these tools, but because OpenSHAPA is open-source (GPLv3) we will encourage researchers to make code contributions to share with the community.
Engaging the Developmental Science Community
We have engaged the developmental science community in planning this project 33. Growing and sustaining that commitment is critical. Community building focuses on 3 goals: (1) building a community of skilled users who guide development of OpenSHAPA and data management tools; (2) nurturing a community of data contributors who share useful and informative datasets; and (3) fostering a community of users who turn contributed datasets into new discoveries. We will build on the current OpenSHAPA online support community by hosting training workshops at developmental conferences—ICIS, ISDP, CDS, and SRCD—and in summer sessions. We will provide on-site workshops at user clusters (NYU, PSU, U Iowa, etc.), and support staff will provide web-based needs analysis, technical assistance, and training. We will continue to reach out to developmental researchers and their IRBs to secure data-sharing agreements and new data deposits and will refine template permission language based on community feedback. We will create user communities around the Databrary.org tools and website and its user comment forum. Advisor Bessor’s students in the NYU Moving Image Archiving & Preservation Program 37 will help new users of Databrary.org to find relevant data sets and learn how to make an investigator’s own data more suitable for sharing. We will create listserv and other mechanisms to announce new data and tool contributions and citations of existing datasets/tools in publications. We will invite selected users to our advisory board meetings to give input.
Timeline of the Project Activities
Cyberinfrastructure
The cyberinfrastructure for this project (Figure 3) requires the integration of multiple components: desktop/client coding (OpenSHAPA) and data management tools, and a centralized, high capacity video + metadata-sharing system.
￼11
￼Figure 3. Diagram of the system architecture showing the various components and how they will interact.
Data Access API. The application layer will consist of a RESTful 38 API constructed in either Ruby on Rails 39 or node.js 40 (in conjunction with a framework such as RailwayJS 41 or Tower.js 42). This API will provide authorization hooks and other mechanics for uploading, searching, and retrieving media and associated metadata. Responses from this API will be returned in JSON 43 and will form the protocol that coordinates communication between the application, web client and data management tools. We will publish detailed documentation for the Databrary API so that authorized researchers can build their own tools to search, explore and mine content held within Databrary.org. Transcoding of incoming video into a HTML5 compliant format will be performed by open source software such as ffmpeg 62.
Video Bandwidth. The Databrary does not require content delivery networks (e.g., Level 3) on which commercial video services (e.g., Netflix, Hulu) rely. Streaming is only required for browsing video previews; video previews will be short; and, the number of simultaneous users will at most be in the tens or hundreds. Existing NYU and PSU network infrastructure can meet the demand of the Databrary service.
Data Storage. Data deposited in Databrary.org will be largely held in a NoSQL document store such as MongoDB 44. Video and other media data will likely reside directly on the file system, with path references held in our document store. This will provide us with the flexibility to distribute video across multiple locations/machines/storage arrays to ensure speedy video access. Search indexes will be stored using the preferred format of the open source libraries such as Apache Solr 45 and Lucene 46 that we employ to power search.
Authorization. An effective user identification and authorization system is essential to preserve data integrity and participant confidentiality. We will explore multiple options for storing credentials of authorized users including external services such as OAuth 47, OpenID 48 or Shibboleth 49. Alternatively we may use open source libraries such as devise 50 or authlogic 51 to internally store user credentials within the Databrary itself. In deciding among the options, we will rely on our internal and external advisors who have faced similar challenges (e.g., ICPSR, BIRN, and the NYU Libraries).
Web Client. The web client will largely comprise of views presented by the application layer, as well as rich HTML5 52 applications for browsing data stored within Databrary. These rich data representations will be built with tools such as WebGL 53 and video streaming libraries such as videojs 54 or MediaElement.js 55.
Data Management Tools. The data management tools will be built using the same technology stack as the application/storage layer that we use for databrary.org. This will be packaged as an easy to install web application that researchers will be able to install in their labs. When uploading data to databrary.org, contributors will also indicate the permission levels granted by the participants. The access levels will also determine which data use agreement is applied to the study. OpenSHAPA and other applications will be able to communicate with the
12
data management tool by its own separate RESTful API. The data management tool will provide features to import tags from other coding applications and be responsible for stitching together all the sharable files that comprise a study.
Collaborative Project Management. OpenSHAPA source code is held in the distributed version control system Git 63, supported by a Fogbugz 64-based wiki 65. Jenkins 66 serves as our continuous integration platform; it automatically checks our Git repository for changes to the OpenSHAPA source code, and runs tests on Windows and OSX before finally updating the development snapshot page 67. We also use Fogbugz to maintain a feature and fix backlog and for release scheduling, but may upgrade to a Kanban board based tool (e.g., PivotalTracker 68 or GreenHopper 69). Databrary development will build on this foundation.

Coordination/Management Plan

Core Investigative Team

Five investigators will lead the project. Co-PI Karen Adolph (NYU) is the Project Director. Adolph has 25 years of experience collecting and analyzing behavior in naturalistic and experimental studies with infants, children, and adults using video, eye tracking, and motion tracking tools 56. With Sanderson and Freeman, she has expanded MacSHAPA and developed OpenSHAPA. Adolph will oversee development efforts at NYU, coordinate activities with the NYC-NJ user node, focus on community building in the larger developmental science community, and work on expanding integration of eye-tracking and motion-tracking with OpenSHAPA. Co-PI Rick Gilmore (PSU) is an Associate Director. Gilmore has 20 years of experience collecting and analyzing video, survey, EEG, and fMRI data from infants, children, and adults 58,59. He also is the founding director of Penn State’s imaging center 60. Gilmore’s primary role will be to work with Freeman, Millman, and PSU IT staff on the PSU data mirror. In addition, he will coordinate activities associated with the PSU user node, work on integrating imaging data streams into OpenSHAPA, and focus on analysis tool development with PSU advisors Molenaar, Ram, and Zhang. Co-PI Penelope Sanderson (UQ) is also an Associate Director.
57. She will focus on the further development of OpenSHAPA and related utilities to support researchers using video and other media in their research. In addition, she will supervise scientometric studies of the impact of Databrary and OpenSHAPA on the developmental science community. Co-PI Clinton Freeman (UQ) is the
Lead Architect. Freeman has 10 years of software development experience. He led the technical development of OpenSHAPA 16, Usermetrix 61, and developed data archiving tools through the Department of Archaeology at U of Sydney. Freeman’s role will mix the duties of solutions architect, systems architect, project manager and test manager. He will oversee all activities of the software development team. Co-I David Millman (NYU) is Director of Digital Library Technology Services at NYU. Millman has 30 years of experience as a developer and manager of internet-based information systems. Millman will focus on issues of curation, transcoding, storage, and preservation and serve as the liaison with NYU libraries.
Coordination: The team will meet weekly via videoconference and in person twice annually in NYC during advisory meetings. In addition, the team will expand the existing web-based project planning/management systems used for OpenSHAPA to keep all members apprised of the project’s progress. The team has established excellent collaborative relationships in the development of this proposal. Should disagreements arise, we will settle them by majority vote.
Advisory Groups
Our external advisors have a wide range of expertise in developmental science, education, cyberscience, and data-sharing: Martha Alibali (Wisconsin), George Alter (UM, ICPSR), Richard
￼￼Sanderson developed MacSHAPA and OpenSHAPA and through her human factors
￼research brings to the project 25 years of developing seminal ideas to guide researchers
￼towards richer ways of handling data streams
￼13
Aslin (Rochester), Roger Bakeman (Georgia State), Bennett Bertenthal (Indiana; SIDGrid), Cole Galloway (Delaware), Carl Kesselman (USC; BIRN), Brian MacWhinney (CMU; TalkBank), Roy Pea (Stanford), and Linda Smith (Indiana). The external advisory group will meet twice annually in Years 1 and 2 and annually thereafter. Letters of support are included as attachments.
Advisers internal to NYU and PSU will provide guidance about operations. These include: David Ackerman (NYU), Howard Besser (NYU), Paul Horn (NYU), Yann Lecun (NYU), Susan McHale (PSU), Carol Mandel (NYU), Peter Molenaar (PSU), Jan Plass (NYU), Padma Raghavan (PSU), Nilam Ram (PSU), and Luke Zhang (PSU). Letters of support are included as attachments. We will meet with internal advisors at least twice yearly to shape the progress of the effort; one or both meetings will coincide with the external advisory board meeting.
User & Contributor Community
There is already a critical mass of OpenSHAPA users in the NYC area. This diverse group of developmental researchers has pledged to contribute to the Databrary and to provide critical feedback about OpenSHAPA and the open data-sharing tools (labs include Adolph, Blair, Castellanos, Meltzi, Raver, Rhodes, Ruble, Tamis-LeMonda, Vouloumanos, and Way at NYU, Berger and Karasik at CUNY, LoBue and Van der Walle at Rutgers Newark, and P. Gordon and A. Gordon at Columbia U). These users will be in close physical proximity to the development team so that developers can visit labs, observe how labs are using the software, and adjust development plans and priorities accordingly. We will also establish similar “beta-testing” communities of data and tool contributors at PSU, Indiana, Carnegie Mellon, Iowa, and Rochester in close physical proximity to the PIs and advisory members. Some of these users will be invited to participate in internal or combined internal/external advisory meetings.
We have already solicited contributor commitments from 80+ colleagues in developmental science (see 33 for an updated list and sample letters of support attached). They have agreed to seek approval from their local IRBs or research review boards for changes in participant consent procedures that would enable open sharing of video data. This level of support for a project that has yet to be launched gives us confidence that this effort can succeed.
Evaluation and Assessment
Our primary goal will be to evaluate whether developmental scientists are achieving a deeper, richer, and broader understanding of development and behavior as a result of this project. Using PI Sanderson and advisor Besser’s expertise, we will collect quantitative and qualitative information to help answer this question.
First, we will track use of the sharing repository over the years of the project. We will collect statistics on the growth in number of datasets contributed, number of contributors, number of Databrary user accounts, frequency of Databrary.org access, number of previews of dataset metadata, number of full dataset views, and number of full dataset downloads. We will also perform user surveys and collect usage information from user forums, FAQs, and other online tools, and track attendance at workshops and training sessions. Second, we will track the impact of the Databrary on scientific output by collecting statistics on the number of studies citing shared datasets, papers whose authors have placed the data in the repository, papers whose authors have used data contributed to the repository, papers reinterpreting prior studies by reanalyzing raw data in the repository, and integrative meta-analyses or reviews whose authors have accessed raw data from the repository. Third, we will examine the role of OpenSHAPA in helping researchers perform richer analyses of their data, contributing to scientific quality. We will track the usage profile of OpenSHAPA, the activity on its user forums, FAQs, and so on, and attendance at OpenSHAPA workshops and training. We will track the number of published papers that use OpenSHAPA. Most importantly, we will evaluate whether OpenSHAPA is changing scientific practice by examining the number of papers that integrate multiple measures to address behavior holistically when testing hypotheses.
￼14
Future Directions and Sustainability
Preservation of the Data Archive
NYU Library has committed to preserving the archive indefinitely beyond the lifetime of the grant (attached letter of support). NYU support after NSF funding ends will depend on the number of researchers continuing to contribute to the archive, the number of researchers continuing to search it and download data, and other factors. The team commits to working with the NYU Library to explore permanent solutions, including partnering with an externally-funded institution (e.g. ICPSR).
Software Maintenance
We aim to bring the Databrary, data management, and OpenSHAPA tools to maturity within the grant period. At that point, the need for development and programming staff will be reduced, but not eliminated because the tools must be maintained and upgraded. The fact that OpenSHAPA and the sharing tools will be open source will help to ensure sustainability. The development team will identify researchers who make technically competent contributions and ask those people to take on more responsibilities.
Identifying New Partnerships for Support
Further funding may come from tag-on projects, other research communities, other agencies, or via in-kind support from other funded researchers. New needs within developmental science will likely emerge that lead to new funding opportunities. Moreover, as data-sharing becomes imperative in other disciplines that depend on video and time-based media (anthropology, linguistics, human cognition and perception, cognitive neuroscience, social psychology), other communities may wish to start data-sharing efforts with new archives accessed through Databrary.org. Some of the funding to support such efforts will go toward support of the sharing infrastructure. European and Asia-Pacific funding agencies may provide support.
Summary
Intellectual Merit. By creating tools for open video data-sharing, we expect to deepen insights and accelerate the pace of discovery in developmental science. The contribution of a particular dataset will no longer depend on the private analytic and interpretive activities of researchers from one laboratory, but instead benefit from the critique of many researchers with different viewpoints. This strengthens the credibility of the research enterprise as a whole. Researchers will be able to view one another’s datasets and reanalyze them to test competing hypotheses or address new questions beyond the scope of the original study.
Broader Impacts. The infrastructure we will develop will have impacts beyond the developmental science community. The entire behavioral science community can benefit from the OpenSHAPA and open data-sharing tools, and we expect that insights that emerge from this project can facilitate open data-sharing and better data management practices in other research communities. Moreover, through our community building, we will train a new generation of developmental scientists who will be empowered with an unprecedented set of tools for discovery. Some of the researchers who benefit will come from institutions without substantial resources to support scientific research. Finally, since some data sets will be available for public viewing, we will raise the profile of developmental science and bolster interest in and support for scientific research among the public at large.
