DATA INTERVIEW STEP ONE: PERMISSABLE DATA:ANDREA: Have you thought about what kind of data you want to share? It may very well be that your current consent or release forms or any forms you have may allow you to share past datasets on databrary. (open a conversation about already permissioned data) PI: I’d like to share everything I can share. What can I share on databrary?Lisa: Let me see your forms,  (evolution of forms) Action items for PIs: Where are there IRB protocols? Can past release forms be okayed by the IRB? A: Who in your lab or what other collaborators do you want to share edit/viewing access with? DATA INTERVIEW  STEP TWO: GATHERING INFORMATION ABOUT THE DATASET.Can you show me where and how you organize your metadata and your videos? Can you briefly explain how your data is organized and how you describe the different components? (coding/coding manuals/protocols/lists of subjects). On Databrary right now, we are organizing by the session level. We are considering a session to be specific period of time when a participant or participants are being observed. Knowing that, if you had to sit down and enter data yourself for a few days, how would you organize your data? What is a session or a dataset to you? (Karen note: a session and dataset are not the same thing; maybe explain that a session is nested in a dataset which can be a part of a study?) Could you provide a descriptive title and a two or three sentence description of your dataset(s) that we can post on Databrary? You can think about this and send it to me later, and we can always change it. How many participants/households are included in your dataset?On the participant level, we really want birthday and test date information. Do you have that data? Is there any other data you have about participants you want to share that is specific and useful for understanding your data? Other PIs have provided ethnicity, race, language and …information. Do you have any multi-visit or longitudinal studies where you have the same participants you want to keep track of? Do you have any standardized forms of description or metadata? Is this amount of organization and description sufficient for another person with similar expertise to be able to understand and properly use the data?Can you please walk me through the research project from the point of view of the data? In particular, I would like to know what happens to the data, especially the raw data, and what you do with the raw data. What other data is created from the raw data, in terms of refinement, analysis, and the final data product? What stage is this data in now? Once your data is collected, how do you refine and use it? For example, what do you consider raw data? How many files exist and in what format? What are the most important components of the data to share on databrary? What other files do you want to share that describe the data? Keep in mind that we really want is raw data. Any other metadata is extra and welcome, but our most important goal is to share raw data. We want the coding and procedures. What tools – software or hardware – are used to generate your data? How? What tools  -software or hardware- are required to use your data? How? Is this tool needed by others to make use of your data? How do you currently manage your data? Do you back up your data? How and how often? Do you take any security measures to protect your data? If so, what? Can you please tell me what data from what stages you would be willing to share and with whom? No oneImmediate collaborators/InstitutionOthers in my fieldEveryone/publicRaw Data (e.g. videos, filled-out questionnaires, etc)Analysis Material (e.g. coding, syntax files, spss files, etc)Supplementary Materials (e.g. coding manuals, blank questionnaires, protocols, measures, etc)Other (please define)When would you be willing to share your data? Immediately?  After the results are published? What keywords would you use to find your own data in Databrary?Do you have pictures or images you want to add to your data? Or should we pull thumbnails from your videos? What preparations or actions, if any, would need to take place before your data could be shared with Databrary? For instance, reviewing the data, scrubbing the data for identifying information, ensuring compliance with your IRB, checking consent levels?What made you decide to deposit your data into databrary? Are there any services in particular you want databrary to provide?Do you have any concerns about sharing your data in databrary? What is the next step we need to take to share your data?Are there any relevant documents or publications that would help me better understand your data? Are there other things about your research you’d like to share? Let’s talk about it. We can expound on your videos, what you scored, your coding manual, etc. 